added for CR late bill part and improved docs for cost management (#934)
meshcloud/meshcloud-docs: docs/meshstack.billing.md

---
id: meshstack.billing
title: Cost Management
---

> meshStack's cost management functionaloty enable developers to track resource usage, while platform teams can monitor overall costs and allocate them to specific teams. These cost management capabilities can be broken down into three key sections: metering, billing, and chargeback.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
meshStack's cost management functionality enables developers to track resource usage, while platform teams can monitor overall costs and allocate them to specific teams. These cost management capabilities can be broken down into three key sections: metering, billing, and chargeback.
```

> Learn more about how your cloud foundation team can enable cloud cost management in
> the [Cloud Foundation Maturity Model](https://cloudfoundation.meshcloud.io/maturity-model/cost-management/)

## Metering

> Metering is the process of collecting and calculating cloud resource usage. Metering also involves pricing this resource usage to calculate cost.

meshStack collects all usage information from public cloud providers, each of which has its own metering processes. For private clouds like OpenStack, OpenShift, and Cloud Foundry, meshStack has its own metering system to for example accurately calculate how many RAM hours and vCPU hours a virtual machine consumes over a given period.

> Cloud resources exhibit various traits. For instance, a virtual machine typically includes both RAM and vCPU. A crucial component of meshStack is the Product Catalog, which is a list of traits that are relevant for you and prices for them. With Product Catalof you can set not only usage prices but also additional prices to cover licensing costs and maintenance of Platform. Please read more information about the Product Catalog [here](meshstack.billing-configuration.md#setting-internal-prices).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cloud resources exhibit various traits. For instance, a virtual machine typically includes both RAM and vCPU. A crucial component of meshStack is the Product Catalog, which is a list of traits that are relevant for you and prices for them. With the Product Catalog, you can set not only usage prices but also additional prices to cover licensing costs and maintenance of a Platform. Please read more information about the Product Catalog [here](meshstack.billing-configuration.md#setting-internal-prices).
```

## Billing

> Billing is the process of attributing resource usage to cloud tenants and creating appropriate invoices.

meshStack is creating monthly [Tenant Usage Reports](meshcloud.project-metering.md) that aggregate cloud resource usage data for each tenant over a specific period. These reports not only summarize resource consumption but can also include additional pricing information, as mentioned earlier, along with discounts, such as volume discounts.

> Furthermore, instead of providing a single, large invoice as cloud providers do, meshStack prepares invoices tailored to dedicated teams based on their usage, so that they will have a clear overview of cloud costs. This invoce called chargeaback statment, which is aslo used to correctly allocate costs to teams. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, instead of providing a single, large invoice as cloud providers do, meshStack prepares invoices tailored to dedicated teams based on their usage, so that they will have a clear overview of cloud costs. This invoice is called a chargeback statement, which is also used to correctly allocate costs to teams. 
```
